---
sidebar_position: 1
hide_title: false
---


[back to Handbook Chapter 1](/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/Chapter-01/Selected%20country%20experiences)

# Chapter 1: Planning & Management

**Kenya**

The planning process started in 2015 (four years to the census date). The proposal provided a road map and detailed plan on how to effectively operationalise all three phases of the census processes: the pre-enumeration phase, enumeration phase and post-enumeration phase. The proposal was developed internally by the KNBS staff. The drafted proposal went through vigorous revisions based on inputs from various census experts, stakeholders and other government departments before finalisation and eventual approval of the document two years later in May 2017. After finalisation of the census project proposal, a cabinet memo was developed to forward the proposal to the cabinet for information and approval.

The approval paved the way for gazettement of the 2019 Census process to start in November 2018 and this gave the process legal backing. The census was implemented within the provisions of the Kenya Constitution, 2010 and the Statistics Act No. 4 of 2006.

Subject matter specialists worked on individual budgets which were later merged and discussed. After the first draft, consultations were made internally, and further improvements were made through engagement of various stakeholders before submitting them to the cabinet for approval.

Committees and offices coordinated the implementation of the census process. The legal notice outlined the membership and functions of the committees and office bearers of the census offices. These committees were operationalised by inaugural meetings organised by the respective chairpersons. The members were inducted on their roles and responsibilities during the inauguration.

\-The committees included: National Census Steering Committee, Technical Working Committee, and County Census Committees.

\-The offices included the KNBS Board, National Census Executive Officer and National Census Coordinator created based on the 2019 KPHC Legal Notice No. 205 of 13th Nov 2018.

\-The census secretariat and its sub committees were created by the National Census Coordinator via circulars detailing membership and functions with approval of KNBS Board.

**Namibia**

Various proposals were developed on how to conduct a cost-effective census such as loaning of tablets from other NSOs; usage of Government vehicles for census activities; implementing the census mapping activities in two phases (Pilot Enumeration Areas; the remainder of Enumeration Areas). Development of the field operations workplan was based on three phases (Pilot Census, Census Enumeration and Post- Enumeration Survey).

Internal stakeholders’ workshops were conducted to create awareness and ownership among the Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA) and to solicit inputs on the census project documents. Given the need to use schools for census training venues, the ministry of education was consulted to adjust the school calendar to cater for census dates.

Fourteen regional stakeholder engagement workshops were held two years in advance (in 2019) to create awareness about the planned 2021 Population and Housing Census. Consultative meetings with line ministries, development partners, and private entities were also held to mobilise resources (funds, tablets, vehicles).

With the support of the Namibia Statistics Agency Board and Minister, the census proposal was submitted to the Cabinet Committee on Treasury through the census structure. In addition, several updates/briefing notes were submitted to the Minister of Economics and Planning to further brief His Excellency the President on the census undertaking.

The project document had a clear census structure highlighting the roles of:

\- the high-level functions such as census management structure, with the Statistician General as the National Census Coordinator supported by a Census Manager.

\- key administrative and management organs of the census such as the cabinet, Minister of Economics and Planning, National Census Steering Committee (high level).

The budget was developed internally and later presented to potential donors and development partners for possible funding opportunities. The highest budget drivers were census mapping activities; CAPI technology devices; vehicle rentals and remuneration of field personnel (due to an increase in Enumeration Areas). The budget was revised on several occasions due to inadequate funding from the government.

Committees were formed both at National and Regional level to guide and coordinate the census implementation. They included: High level/steering Committee; Inter-census technical committee; Census advocacy and publicity Committee; Regional census Committees; Census Procurement committee; Census recruitment Committee and Census resource Mobilisation Committee.

Sub committees were formed within NSA and Subcommittee leaders were issued with Terms of Reference outlining their specific roles and expected outputs. These included: Census Methodology, IT & Data Processing committee; Census Field Operation and logistics Sub-committee; Census advocacy and publicity Sub Committee; Census Mapping Sub-Committee and Census Quality & methodology Sub-committee.

**Tanzania**

In the United Republic of Tanzania, the plan of conducting the 2022 Population and Housing Census (PHC) started in 2019 by developing the 2022 PHC Management and Implementation Strategic Handbook. This document provides a comprehensive strategy for planning, organising and mobilising adequate human, material and financial resources required for conducting the 2022 PHC. This strategy aims at ensuring that activities to be undertaken prior, during and after the census enumeration exercise are completed as scheduled and give a clear explanation on the entire census undertaking programme including the budget.

The strategy was developed internally by the NBS staff with several reviews based on inputs from various census experts, stakeholders and other government departments before finalization and eventual approval of the strategy document. Official launching of the handbook was done by the Prime Minister of the United Republic of Tanzania on 19th March 2021.

The approval paved the way for gazettement of the 2022 Census process to start and this gave the process legal backing. The 2022 PHC was implemented with regard of the Tanzania Statistics Act Cap 351. It highlighted key issues for the implementation of census undertaking. Composition of national level to local level census committees were explained and their role.

The detailed work-plan indicating the sequence and estimated duration of each component operation of the Census under major outputs was developed. The work-plan indicated the responsible party, time, place of execution and output for each major activity. This was one of the components in the Census Implementation and Strategic Handbook.

The 2022 TPHC budget was developed internally and reviewed by the management of NBS and later presented to the Ministry of finance for approval. About 97 percent of the 2022 PHC budget was sponsored by the government, 3 percent was contributed by donors. Also, potential donors and development partners contributed some equipment like tablets, and computers. However, it was later decided to run together the Population and Housing Census with the Building Census and National Physical addressing exercise, this decision led to the revision of budget.

Census Committees were developed at national, regional and district levels. At national level there were four committees which as follows:

1.  Central Census Committee at national level co-chaired by the Prime Minister and the Second Vice President, Zanzibar to provide general guidelines and mobilize resources for census undertaking.
2.  The National Advisory Committee, responsible for advising the Central Census Committee on all issues related to Census.
3.  Collaborators’ forum for the Government, development partners and funding agencies that have contributed to the Census undertaking. Development partners and funding agencies will use this forum to monitor the progress of Census activities.
4.  Technical Advisory Committee consisting of a group of experts responsible for technical issues pertaining to the census undertaking.

Regional and District Census Committees was responsible for Census implementation in the respective region. This committee facilitated all logistics related to the Census at regional/district level. The Committee will also be responsible for publicity and advocacy of the Census undertaking at regional/district level.

**Sierra Leone**

Development of the census proposal employed an inclusive approach, which underscored the benefits of coordination and collaboration between the governance structures of the census project. Preparations started with a review of the lessons learnt from the previous census to inform the plan while avoiding the 2015 PHC pitfalls for a smoother operation to ensure a more cost-effective approach that was inclusive, meaningful, practical, creative, and timely.

The NSO operations Act provided the legal authority for the census undertaking which is in harmony with the objectives and strategy of the census programme. A Legal Notice was published in accordance with the Census Act. His excellency the president proclaimed the census undertaking.

The plan was aimed at being highly responsive to National Development Goals to gain popular approval and national ownership and ensure alignment to the Sustainable Development Goals.

The existing legal basis for Population and Housing Censuses has provision for the appointment of a Census Advisory Committee to provide policy guidelines, mobilise the necessary resources for the Census, and generally act as the link between the Government and the Census Secretariat.

A Census Secretariat was set up with the NSO’s regional and district offices headed by statisticians serving as the field arm. Census Technical Committee was established to address all the technical aspects of the census, and it drew its membership from technical Units of the NSO, various Ministries Departments and Agencies, the Universities, National Population Commission, Civil Societies, and development partners/donor agencies like the UNCT, DFID, EU, World Bank, ADB etc.

Census Communication, Publicity and Advocacy Committee was established to inform and prepare the public about census activities and the need for everyone to cooperate during the census exercise.

Outsourcing technical support was done and consultancy support was provided by UNFPA/World Bank/ UNECA. Technical backstopping was in the fields of census organization, census desk top review, census quality control and evaluation, census communication/operational control, electronic programming of questionnaire/analysis (mapping/listing of localities, data processing/ data base management and data analysis/ dissemination.)

[back to Handbook Chapter 1](/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/Chapter-01/Selected-Country-Experiences)
